what is a period	The menstrual period (menstruation), which we commonly refer to as just a "period," is the shedding of uterine lining. Blood and endometrial tissue flow down through cervix and vagina.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
what is menstrual cycle	The menstrual cycle is the monthly hormone cycle a female's body goes through to prepare for pregnancy. Woman's menstrual cycle is counted from the first day of your period up to the first day of her next period. Your hormone levels usually change throughout this cycle and can menstrual symptoms.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
how long is typical menstrual cycle	The typical menstrual cycle is 28-29 days long. But each woman is different. Also, a woman's menstrual cycle length might be different from month-to-month. Your periods are still regular if they usually come every 24 to 38 days. This means that the time from the first day of your last period up to start of your next period is at least 24 days but not more than 38 days.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
why does period happen	A period releases the tissue that grew to support a possible pregnancy. It happens after each menstrual cycle in the which a pregnancy does not occur-i.e. when an egg hasn't been fertilized and/or attached itself to the uterine wall. The uterous then sheds the lining which had grown to receive a fertilized egg.{reference: helloclue.com}
what is the point of getting period	Period happen as a result of hormones released from a gland at the base of female brain called the pituitary gland. These hormones cause an egg to be released. At the same time, the lining of a uterous (or womb) is becoming thicker- like a soft and spongy bed, ready for the egg.{reference: helloclue.com}
can a womans period change	Period can change. It can fluctuate for a while after it first start. But if a woman had her period for a few years, it should generally be about the same length and volume each cycle. She may still notice changes from time to time, though- the heaviness and length of her period depends on her hormones, which can fluctuate.{reference: helloclue.com}
what other way can a womans period change	Hormones can change a woman's period temporarily because of things like stress, over-excercising, diet, or taking an emergency contraception pill.{reference: helloclue.com}
does not ovulating makes difference	The period will also be different than normal if a woman don't ovulate each cycle- she may miss a period, or it may come later than usual, and/or be heavier or lighter and shorter or longer than her norm. Not ovulating regularly- anovulation- is common during adolescence and perimenopause, and is a common cause of temporarily absent and/or heavy menstrual periods.{reference: helloclue.com}
what is considered to be normal	A period that happens every 24-38 days, a period that lasts between 4-8 days. A period of between 5-80 ml(that's up to 6 tablespoons). An average period sheds about 2 to 3 tablespoons of blood and tissue. Peope who are in the upper 5-6 tablespoons are considered to have heavy menstrual bleeding. Ask your partner/ friend/ relative about any problem and then talk to a doctor if the woman you know has her period- heavy (or painful) that it interferes with her daily activities. Prolonged heavy menstrual bleeding leads to anemia.{reference: helloclue.com}
what is normal amount of bleeding during my period	The average woman loses about two to three tablespoons of blood during her period. Your periods may be lighter or heavier than the average amount. What is normal for you may not be the same for someone else. Also, the flow may be lighter or heavier from month to month.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
when should i see a doctor	A prolonged period with heavy menstrual bleeding and painful is sign of needing medical assistance. However, ask your loved one/friend/relative if she is noticing clumps or clots especially on heaviest days and noticing changes in color of her menstrual blood over her period is normal. Darker colors are common when flow is light.{reference: helloclue.com}
how much period does one person has in one lifetime	Half the population spends roughly 40 reproductive years with a menstrual cycle.That adds up about 450 periods over one person's lifetime.{reference: helloclue.com}
what is menstrual cycle	The mestrual cycle is more than just a period. It's how the female body prepares to get pregnant. Hormonal changes happen on every day of the cycle, creating symptoms that are subtle (cervical fluid) and not subtle (painful cramps). Every cycle, extra blood and tissue are added to the lining of the uterus (the endometrium) and an ovary releases an egg for fertilization (ovulation). The lining of the uterus is where a fertilized egg can attach and grow. If there is no fertilized egg, or if pregnancy doesn't occur, that extra blood and tissue is expelled from the body. That's what the Period is. The period is not just blood, but also contains clots of endometrial tissue and the dissolved remnants of a tiny egg.{reference: helloclue.com}
what are premenstrual symptoms	Premenstrual symptoms are a set of symptoms that repeat every month in the days before the period starts. Contrary to what pop culture tell us, premenstrual symptoms are not only about mood swing and chocolate cravings.{reference: helloclue.com}
tell me more about premenstrual symptoms	Some of the obvious symptoms are : 1)Up to 88% of women experience cramps every cycle. Painful cramps can make it difficult to concentrate. 2)~60% of women get acne breakouts. 3)~70% have sore breats 4)~60% feel bloated 5)~25% have diarrhea. As for emotional symptoms, it's important to note that despire cultural messaging, not everyone's emotiopns change change when experiecing premenstrual symptoms. (Though, it stands to reason that anybody who's going through a lot of physical discomfort is likely to be grumpy). However, please note that emotional symptoms and their intensity are unique to each person, from mild, to debilitating. Try learning about the premenstrual symptoms and coping strategies of women you're close to. If they have painful cramps, for example, there may be something you can do to help out.{reference: helloclue.com}
what is normal menstrual cycle	The regular cycle is 23-35 days long and may vary by as many as (+-) 8 days from month to month. The body is not a clock. Every woman's cycle is different. The heaviest bleeding is usually one of the first few days of the period, so when the period, so when the period has surprise start, it could be on the heaviest day. Menstrual cycles that fall outside of these ranges are considered clinically irregular - as are periods that very long, heavy or painful. These can show some serious medical condition. If a woman in your life, has irregular cycles, they should talk to their healthcare provider and find out why.{reference: helloclue.com}
is it true that a woman is only fertile for about 7 days every month	Remember what you were taught in school, that sex on any day can lead to pregnancy? It's not true, but it's the safest thing to say when kids can't stop giggling long enough to understand the details. Even now, you may be surprised to learn that the seven-day timeframe when intercourse can lead to pregnancy (called the "fertile window") is seven days long because that's how long your sperm can live inside her body. While her egg only lives for up to 24 hours, she can still get pregnant if you have sex six days before her egg is ready(ovulation).{reference: helloclue.com}
what is ovulation	It refers to a mature egg being released from the ovary. But, it takes a few steps and hormones to get there. During the first half of your cycle, multiple follicles-fluid-filled sacs containing immature eggs-grows until one emerges as dominant. Eventually, the dominant one secretes estradiol which leads to a surge in luteinizing hotmone, causing the dominant follicle to rupture, and a mature egg is released. {reference: avawomen.com}
when is the best time to get pregnant	According to major studies, best chances of conceiving are highest two days before ovulation. However, counting days to determing ovulation can create risks of pregnancy when that's not wanted, or make it harder to get pregnant if you're trying.{reference: avawomen.com}
how to avoid unwanted pregnancy	For men, the simple answer for cotraception is to use a condom every time and use it correctly. Find a condom that fits you well and use a bit of lube on the tip, before putting her condom on, This can help condoms be less of a turnoff. Chafting from condoms goes both ways. It's also good for you to learn where she needs lube when using condoms. Besides condoms, reliable contraceptive options for men are limited. They include getting a vasectomy, only engaging in nonintercourse sex play or just never having sex. {reference: helloclue.com}
what happens during the typical 28 day menstrual cycle	Day 1 starts with the first day of period. The blood and tissue lining the uterus breaks down and leave the body. This is your period. For many women, bleeding lasts from 4 to 8 days. Hormone levels are low. Low levels of the hormone estrogen can make a woman feel depressed or irritiable. Day 1-5 of the cycle, fluid-filled pockets called follicles develop on the ovaries. Each follicle contains an egg. Day 5-7, just one folluicle continues growing while the others stop growing and are absorbed back into the ovary. Levels of the hormone estrogen from the ovaries continue rising. By Day 8 the follicle puts out incresing levels of estrogen and grows larger. Usually by Day 8, period bleeding has stopped. Higher estrogen levels from the follicle make the lining of the uterus grow and thicken. Then uterine lining is rich in blood and nutrients and will help nourish the embryo if a pregnancy happens. Estrogen helps boost endorphines, which are the "feel good" brain chemicals that are also released during physical activity. Woman may have more energy and feel relaxed or calm. Day 14, a few days before Day 14, woman's estrogen levels peak and cause a sharp rise in the level of luteinizing hormone. LH cause the mature follicle to burst and release an egg from ovary on Day 14. Day 15 to 24, the fallopian tubes help the newly released egg travel away from the ovary toward uterus. Lastly, Day 24-28 if the egg is not fertilized, it breaks apart. Around Day 24, woman's estrogen and progesterone levels drop if woman is  not pregnant. This rapid change in the levels of strogen and progesterone can cause woman's moods to change. In the final step of the menstrual cycle, the unfertilized egge leaves the body along with the uterine linig, beginning on Day 1 of woman's next period and menstrual cycle. {reference: womenhealth.gov}
what is luteinizing hormone	LH is a hormone released by woman's brain that tells the ovary to release an egg.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
how does my menstrual cycle change as woman gets older	Often, periods are heavier when a woman's younger (in her teens) and usually get lighter in her 20s and 30s. This is normal. For few years after her first period, menstrual cycles longer than 30 days are common. Girls usually get more regular cycles within three years of starting their periods. If longer or irregular cycles last beyond that, see you doctor. In her 20s and 30s, womans cycles are usually regular and can last anywhere from 24 to 38 days. In her 40s, as her body starts the transition to menopause, her cycles might become irregular. Woman's menstrual periods might stop for a month or few months and then start again. They also might be shorter or last longer than usual, or be lighter or heavier than normal. {reference: womenhealth.gov}
why should i keep track of my menstrual cycle	If your periods are regular tracking them will help you know when you ovulate, when you are most likely to get pregnant, and when to expect your next period to start. If your periods are not regularm tracking them can help you share any problems with your doctor or nurse. Finally, if you have period pain or bleeding that causes you to miss school or work, tracking these period symptoms will help you and your doctor or nurse find treatments that work for you. Sever pain or bleeding that causes you to miss regular activities is not normal and can be treated. {reference: womenhealth.gov}
when does a girl usually get her first period	The average age for a girl in the United States to get her first period is 12. This doesn't mean that all girls start at same age. A girl may start her period anytime between 8 and 15. The first period normally starts about two years after breasts first start to develop and pubic hair begins to grow. The age at which a girl's mother started her period can help predict when a girl may start her period.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
when should a girl see a doctor	A girl should see her doctor if: 1) she starts her period before age 8. 2) She has not had her first period by age 15. 3) She has not had first period within three years of breasts growth {reference: womenhealth.gov}
how long does a woman usually have periods	On average, women get a period for about 40 years of their life. Most women have regular periods until premenopause, the time when your body begins the change to menopause. Perimenopause, or transition to menopausem may take a few years. During this time your period may not come regularly.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
when does menopause happen	Menopause happen when you have not had a period for 12 months in a row. For most women, this happens between the ages of 45 and 55. The average age of menopause in in the United States is 52.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
does period stops during pregnancy	Yes, period also stop during pregnancy and may not come back right away if you breastfeed.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
what are symptoms of heavy menstrual bleeding	Symptoms of heavy menstrual bleeding include: 1) Bleeding through one or more pads or tampons every one to two hours. 2) Passing blood clots longer than the size of quarters. 3) Bleeding that often lasts longer than eight days. {reference: womenhealth.gov}
how often should i change my pad or tampon	Follow the instructions that came with your period product. Try to change or rinse your feminine hygiene product before it becomes soacked through or full. For pads, most women change their pads every few hours. A tampon should not be worn for more than 8 hours because of the risk of toxic shock syndrome(TSS).{reference: womenhealth.gov}
how often should i change menstrual cup, sponge or period panties	Follow the instructions that came with your period product. Try to change or rinse your feminine hygiene product before it becomes soacked through or full. Menstrual cups and sponges may only need to be rinsed once or twice a day. Period panties (underwear with washable menstrual pads sewn in) can usually last about a day, depending on the style and your flow. Follow the instructions that came with your period product. Try to change or rinse your feminine hygiene product before it becomes soacked through or full.Follow the instructions that came with your period product. Try to change or rinse your feminine hygiene product before it becomes soacked through or full.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
what is toxic shock syndrome	TSS is a rare but sometimes deadly condition caused by bacteria that make toxins or poisons.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
can tampons cause toxic shock syndrome	In old days there was a certain brand of super absorbency tampons which said to cause this, and they were taken off the market. Today, mosts cases of TSS are not caused by tampons as they were uses to. But, you could be at risk for TSS if you use more absorbent tampons than you need for your bleeding or if you don't change your tampon often enough (at least every eight hours). Menstrual cups, cervical caps and songes are also known to increrase the risk of TSS if they're left in place for too long (usually 24 hours). Remove sponges within 30 hours and cervical caps within 48 hours.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
are pads better than tampons	Unlike tampons, pads aren't associated with toxic shock syndrome. They can however, still put you at risk for other infections if not changed at a resonable rate.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
what are symptoms of toxic shock syndrome or tss	Symptoms of TSS are 1) Sudden high fever 2) Muscle aches 3) Vomiting 4) Nausea 5) Diarrhea 6) Rash 7) Kidney or other organ faliure.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
how does the menstrual cycle affect other health problems	The changing hormone levels throughout the menstrual cycle can also affect other health problems. Depressions and anxiety disorders, Asthma, Irritable bowel syndrome(IBS) and Bladder pain syndrome are most common among women. Please don't hesitate to seek medical help if you have any health related issues.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
what is menopause phase	Menopause is a normal condition that all women experience as they age. The term menopause can describe any of the the changes a woman goes through either just before or after she stops menstruating, making the end of her reproductive period.{reference: webmd.com}
what causes menopause	Menopause happens when the ovaries no longer release an egg every month and menstruation stops.{reference: webmd.com}
what is perimenopause phase	Perimenopause typically begins several years before menopause, when the ovaries gradually make less estrogen.
what is progesterone hormone	Progesterone is an endrogenous steroid and progesterone sex hormone involved in the menstrual cycle, and pregnancy. {reference: womenhealth.gov}
what is estrogen hormone	Estrogen or oestrogen is the primary female sex hormone. It is responsible for the development and regulation of the female reproductive system and secondary sex characteristics.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
what is premenstrual syndrome or pms	PMS is a combination of physical and emotional symptoms that many women get after ovulation and before the start of their menstrual period. As many is three in four women say they get PMS at some point of their lifetime.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
does pms change with age	Yes, PMS may get worse as you reach your late 30s or 40s and approach menopause are in the transition to menopause, called perimenopause.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
what causes pms	Researchers do not know exactly what causes PMS. Changes in hormone levels durting the menstrual cycle may play a role. {reference: womenhealth.gov}
what is premenstrual dysphoric disorder or pmdd	PMDD is a condition similar to PMS that also happens in the weekor two before your period starts as hormone levels begin to fall after ovulation. PMDD causes more severe symptoms than PMS, including severe depression, irritiablilty, and tension.{reference: womenhealth.gov}
which type of food to avoid during period	Avoid eating and drinking carbonated drinks, excess sugar & salt, too-much processed foods, fried foods, and high-fat foods since they can adversely affect your ongoing cycle. Instead of these, choose fruits and vegetables or fish. {reference: byrdie.com}
what to do when i get my first period	Don't worry! Tell a parent, friend, or teacher. Adults or older siblings can help you get the right informaion and products you need. {reference: rubycup.com}
will anyone know i am on my period	Unless you decide to tell, it's very unlikely anybody else will know that you are on your period. Be sure to wear a safe menstrual product, like a menstrual cup and no one will be able to tell you're menstruating. However, it is a good idea to ask a family or a friend for help if you feel worried. NEVER FEEL ASHAMED OF YOUR PERIOD! {reference:rubycup.com}
can i go swimming or play sports	Yes! some menstrual products let you excercise, swim, and play sports as usual. One of the products becoming more and more popular among active menstruating people are menstrual cups. {reference:rubycup.com}
